Consul concept updates (#1705)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/consul/v1.22.x/content/docs/concept/consensus.mdx

# Consensus

> This page provides conceptual information about the Raft protocol and its implementation in Consul. For more information about the underlying architecture, refer to [Consul backend architecture](/consul/docs/architecture/backend).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page provides conceptual information about the Raft protocol and its implementation in Consul. For more information about the underlying architecture, refer to [Persistent data backend architecture](/consul/docs/architecture/backend).
```

- _Log entries_ are the fundamental unit of work in a Raft system. A log is an ordered sequence of entries, and entries include any cluster changes, such as adding nodes, registering services, and updating key-value pairs.
- The _Raft index_ records when the log entry was made, in an authoritative order. We consider the log consistent when all members agree on the entries and their order.
- The _peer set_ is the set of all members participating in log replication. In Consul, a datacenter's server nodes are the members of the peer set.
- _Quorum_ refers to the majority of a peer set's members. Mathematically, for a set of size `N`, quorum requires at least `(N/2)+1` members. For example, if there are 5 members in the peer set, you need 3 nodes to form a quorum. If a quorum of nodes is unavailable, the Consul cluster becomes _unavailable_ because no new logs can be committed.

## Node elections

Raft nodes are always in one of three states:

- follower
- candidate
- leader

All nodes start out as a _follower_. In the follower state, nodes can:

- accept log entries from the leader

> - cast votes in elections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Accept log entries from the leader
- Cast votes in elections
```

We recommend running either 3 or 5 Consul servers per datacenter to maximize availability without greatly sacrificing performance. For more information, refer to the [deployment table](/concept/reliability#deployment-size), which summarizes the potential cluster size options and their fault tolerance.

## Raft in Consul operations

In Consul, only Consul server nodes are part of the peer set. Because client agents are not part of the peer set, a group of server agents can support thousands of client nodes, without scale affecting the cluster's Raft performance.

### Bootstrap mode

To start a new datacenter, you must place a single Consul server in _bootstrap mode_. This mode allows it to self-elect as a leader. Once a leader is elected, other servers can join the peer set in a way that preserves consistency. After the first set of servers join, you can disable bootstrap mode. For more information, refer to [bootstrap a Consul datacenter](/consul/docs/deploy/server/vm/bootstrap).

### Catalog transactions

> When a request for catalog information or update to the catalog arrives at a non-leader server, it forwards the request to the leader. If it is a _request_, meaning it is read-only, the leader generates the result based on the current state of the Raft log. If it is an _update_, meaning it modifies state, the leader generates a new log entry and applies it using Raft. After the log entry is committed and applied, the transaction is complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-server leaders forward requests for catalog information or updates to the catalog to the leader. If it is a _request_, meaning it is read-only, the leader generates the result based on the current state of the Raft log. If it is an _update_, meaning it modifies state, the leader generates a new log entry and applies it using Raft. After the log entry is committed and applied, the transaction is complete.
```
Consolidated the first sentence for clarity

## Additional information

For more information about the Raft protocol, refer to the following external resources:

- [Consistency (as defined by CAP)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem)

> - ["Raft: In search of an Understandable Consensus Algorithm"](https://raft.github.io/raft.pdf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [The Raft Consensus Algorithm](https://raft.github.io/).
```

I changed this to the landing page since the Raft paper is also linked to in L74.
